it isn't obvious at all that children
and adolescents are spending the bulk of
their time on social media per se
depends on how you define it so so
they're also texting instead of
interacting face to face for example and
then they're also exposing themselves to
other content online like pornography
but then there's there's something more
fundamental I think that's often missed
which is that see when we had little
kids back in the 90 s my wife and I were
the youngest parents we knew with the
oldest kids even though we weren't that
young we didn't start having kids till
we were in our late 20s now one of the
things that would happen was that we
would take our kids over to other houses
that had children and when we got there
the parents would put on a television
show for the kids to watch which I was
never happy with because what should
have happened was the kids were thrown
into the basement so to think speak and
they with nothing to do so that they had
to play and so they could watch TV and
of course they were quiet if they were
doing that but they weren't inventing
their own dramas they weren't
interacting face to face in a manner
that made them come up with the creative
conceptualizations that characterize
dramatic play like playing house for
example that lay the bloody groundwork
for future adult relationships now and
that was TV that had nothing on screens
because everyone was concerned about the
detrimental effect of TV back then but
my God now you know screens are
absolutely everywhere so the screens
have content but they also interfere
with Child's Play and so I'd like your
opinion about that and also one other
thing that I've been thinking about let
me tell me what you think about this you
know I watch all these strange identity
issues that are emerging in adolescence
and even on University campuses in early
adulthood this preoccupation was sexual
identity with gender identity and and
the and also the variant forms of even
more imaginative play that are
associated with that like the furry
culture for example and the anime
culture and what I see there is delayed
dramatic play right so I'm wondering if
what's happening to some of these kids
is that they get away from this
oppressive family environment where
they're never allowed any freedom they
burst out at the age of 17 or 18 and
then they have to frenetically engage in
a dramatic search for identity because
they didn't do it when they were like
three which is when it really needs to
happen we radically underestimate the
significance of dramatic play then we
have dramatic play on the part of
rebellious adolescents constantly you
know as they protest in the streets
that's right 100% you know I've I've
spoken with uh uh Jonathan hay and and
others and and I've really been kind of
uh engaged in the discourse about the
role of social media you know and how
that plays into the development of
emotional regulation you're right how do
we Define that but I think your point
about you know it's basically more
broadly than just whether they're on Tik
Tok or whether they're on Facebook or
whether they're you know on on Snapchat
it's looking at a screen rather than at
another face and you see that wherever
you go I mean even when I do work on a a
supermarket Deli now on on a part-time
basis customers will come in they'll be
looking at their phone or I'll be trying
to look at my phone and it's it's a
completely different world and Landscape
that we're now in that has sort of um
taken away the normal face-to-face
communicative um Rough and Tumble play
where you're actually physically looking
at somebody rather than at a screen or
your your attention is not constantly
looking at a screen so it's much more
broader and and I think the other point
too you said well it's not just social
media you're right it's social media
combined with um a a a sec an increasing
secularism that has basically we've lost
all sense of moral constraint so when
there's no sort of when there's sort of
a weakening of all you know traditional
classical religions and there's no
orienting structure you get thrown into
the social media world where you can
basically create anything that gives
rise to what we see is this complete uh
inability to form you know an identity
in early childhood now they're on the
screens where there it's just basically
a consumer market for identities whether
that's identities as Furies whether it's
an identity as you know gender identity
or even like you say um I mean it's a
complete roleplaying world now that's
happening on social media and one of the
individuals who's done a lot of great
work on this is Katherine Katherine D
who's default friend on on Twitter she's
looked at some of this and I think we're
missing to a certain extent in all the
discourse around the role of social
media on Mental Health you know and the
ability to establish a strong identity
is the is the fact that we're now moving
into a different era where we're
actually living online rather than in
the world and that's why I've been
constantly um stressing the need for uh
Athletics based um programs or
environmental programs where children
are in nature to to get away from this
sort of move movement to a world that's
completely imaginary online because that
leads to all sorts of uh Limitless
ability to establish identities that
identities that while they may exist in
this creative realm when you get back
into the real world they're they're
useless they're they're they're
dysfunctional really and that's sort of
what we see well they're they're also
not subject as far as I can tell they're
also not subject to the constraints that
are characteristic of the real world
like one of the things I've been very
concerned about I'd like your thoughts
on this is I think it was
um what's the boxer's name Mike Tyson
who so famously said the problem with
the virtual world is that it's made all
of you all too comfortable with never
getting punched when you deserve it now
that's a bad paraphrase but he did
actually say that and I think there's
something about that that's actually
very interesting and very correct you
know one of the I've I don't know how
many comments I've looked at online but
it's tens of thousands you know and I've
started to develop something like a
troll
taxonomy and you know there is a culture
online they call L's culture and that's
laugh out loud or I did it for the lulls
and it's basically a culture of sadist
sadists and Psychopaths and this is
actually quite well documented in the
relevant research literature because
there has been ongoing Research into to
the personality structure of provocative
trolls and they're dark tetrad types
they so they'd fit into the cluster B
Psychopathology they
are um narcissistic so they want
unearned attention they're macu valan so
they use their language as a tool to
manipulate rather than to communicate
they're Psychopathic which means they're
predatory parasites and that wasn't good
enough as it turned out because that was
the dark Triad they had to add sadistic
to that and that's where the lulls
element really comes into play because
the sadus takes positive Delight in the
suffering of others and that's really
the nature of L's culture and it can
Thrive online because well people say
things online all the time that would
get them an immediate slap in the real
world like a require a morally required
immediate slap and so they say things
that now this the reason that concerns
me see my sense is that we we know that
the base rate of psychopathy across
cultures is about 4% which isn't that
high but we also know that there were
historical epochs in which the cluster B
personality types probably got the upper
hand and I would suspect that happened
in the French Revolution I think it
probably happened in the Russian
Revolution probably happened during the
rise of the Nazis in in in in uh in
National Socialist Germany you don't
need that many people to disinhibited in
their
Psychopathology before your culture
might be in grave danger and that's
particularly true if they can organize
which they can really do online and so
I'm very concerned that the incentive
structure online
facilitates dark tetrad Behavior now
there's more evidence too right because
here's another problem 25% or
thereabouts of online content is
pornographic
so basically criminal right it's
basically prostitution facilitated by
electronic pimps so that's not good and
then a tremendous amount of online
activity is outright criminal right I
mean older people are just being scammed
on a like an unbelievably constant basis
and so it might be that 50% of online
activity is in the psychopathic
antisocial and cluster B realm it's very
very difficult to regulate and my
suspicions are is that spilling over in
really a really counterproductive manner
into the actual Flesh and Blood world
and so you know I'm curious about your
thoughts about that because one of the
things that's odd about you on Twitter
in a good way is that you are constantly
drawing people's attention to the
relationship between cluster B
Psychopathology and online and political
behavior and so um what do you think
about that as a
hypothesis with regard to the
pathological incentive structure of the
virtual world right maybe it's a
non-playable degenerating game like it
could be well I think in in a lot of
ways that's exactly why and I know
you're familiar with the paper that I
wrote on this is social media is an
incubator of all this cluster B type of
stuff because on on social media um you
have this indirect communicative
language-based um amplification of all
these traits whereas male aggression in
the the real world it doesn't scale you
have encounter there's something said
somebody gets you know punched in the
face and that's it what you have is on
social media indirect aggression and you
have all these traits and antagonism and
histrionic you know behavior that just
basically gets Amplified and emotionally
resonates and resonates and resonates
and Bloons out and it builds and builds
and builds and you you know one of the
best examples of that is what we saw
with Hamas I mean they filmed all their
atrocity as they were going into to
Israel and that was one of the most um
you know interesting in in a morbid way
kind of aspects of that incursion was it
was just film they they were basically
in fact doing it for the laws regardless
of whether you think on how much
atrocities or what was the exact
specific atrocities that were committed
they were filming them on GoPro for
exactly that reason and to amplify that
and so you know that is one way for a
perfect example of how this is is all
spired out of control and I will I will
say for myself you know um others have
written about the cluster B stuff in
terms of political ideology and how
that's played out before um you know the
famous uh Lo looi is one of them and
others so but I just see it so clearly
because when you look at the traits and
you look at what's happening online it's
a perfect incubator for all these just
to continue to amplify and amplify and
amplify without any
um mechanism that limits it and it just
spills out and then what happens is you
have an event like October 7th or you
have an event like what you're seeing on
these campus tent cities all of that's
mediated and Amplified online and then
it gets played out with all this
petulant and Romer room behavior on
campuses
[Music]